---
layout: mfile
title: GPUFFTVideoCaptureDemo
categories:
  - GPGPUDemos
encoding: UTF-8
---

GPUFFTVideoCaptureDemo - Demonstrate use of GPGPU computing for live filtering via 2D-FFT.  

This demo makes use of the FOSS GPUmat toolbox to perform a GPU  
accelerated 2D FFT + filtering in frequency space + 2D inverse FFT on a  
live video feed from video capture or movie playback. GPUmat allows to  
use NVidia's CUDA gpu computing framework on supported NVidia gpu's  
(GeForce-8000 series and later, aka Direct3D-10 or OpenGL-3 capable).  

It shows how a Psychtoolbox floating point texture (with video content  
inside) can be efficiently passed to GPUmat as a matrix of GPUsingle data  
type, which is stored and processed on the GPU. Then it uses GPUmat's fft  
routines for forward/inverse fft's and matrix manipulation. Then it  
returns the final image to Psychtoolbox as a new floating point texture  
for display. The same steps are carried out with Matlab/Octave's regular  
fft routines on the cpu for reference.  

Requires the freely downloadable NVidia CUDA-5.0 SDK/Runtime and the free  
and open-source GPUmat toolbox as well as a compute capable NVidia  
graphics card.  

# Usage:  

GPUFFTVideoCaptureDemo([usegpu=1][, showfft=0][, fwidth=11][, roi=[0 0 640 480]][, depth=1][, deviceId=0][, cameraname])  

# Parameters:  

'usegpu' = 0 to use regular Matlab/Octave fft on CPU, 1 = to use GPUmat on GPU.  

'showfft' = 1 to show amplitude spectrum of video in usegpu=1 mode.  

'fwidth' = Width of low-pass filter kernel in frequency space units.  

'roi' Selects a rectangular subregion of the camera for display. By  
default, it selects a [0 0 640 480] rectangle, ie. the full area of a  
camera with 640 x 480 pixels resolution. This parameter may need tweaking  
for some cameras, as some drivers have bugs and don't work well with all  
settings.  

'depth' = 1 for Mono, 3 for color processing.  

'deviceId' Device index of video capture device. Defaults to system default.  

'cameraname' Name string for selection of video capture device. This is  
only honored if 'deviceId' is a negative number, and only for certain  
video capture plugins. Defaults to none.  



<div class="code_header" style="text-align:right;">
  <span style="float:left;">Path&nbsp;&nbsp;</span> <span class="counter">Retrieve <a href=
  "https://raw.github.com/Psychtoolbox-3/Psychtoolbox-3/beta/./PsychDemos/GPGPUDemos/GPUFFTVideoCaptureDemo.m">current version from GitHub</a> | View <a href=
  "https://github.com/Psychtoolbox-3/Psychtoolbox-3/commits/beta/./PsychDemos/GPGPUDemos/GPUFFTVideoCaptureDemo.m">changelog</a></span>
</div>
<div class="code">
  <code>./PsychDemos/GPGPUDemos/GPUFFTVideoCaptureDemo.m</code>
</div>
